Bylaws2.5 (#32)
cabforum/forum: Bylaws.md

---
title: Bylaws of the CA/Browser Forum
subtitle: Version 2.5
author:
- CA/Browser Forum
date: June XX, 2023  
copyright: |
  Copyright 2023 CA/Browser Forum

  This work is licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International license.
---

# 1. CA/BROWSER FORUM – PURPOSE, STATUS, AND ANTITRUST LAWS

## 1.1 Purposes of the Forum

> The Certification Authority Browser Forum (CA/Browser Forum) is a voluntary gathering of  Certificate Issuers and suppliers of Internet browser software and other applications that use certificates (Certificate Consumers).

Reviewer: Inconsequential edit that I believe can be made without affecting the state of the ballot:
```suggestion
The Certification Authority Browser Forum (CA/Browser Forum) is a voluntary gathering of Certificate Issuers and suppliers of Internet browser software and other applications that use certificates (Certificate Consumers).
```

Author: Unfortunately the Bylaws only allow the Chair to make changes described in section 2.4 (8). This will have to wait for a future update. Can you please open an issue with this proposed change?

Reviewer: Drat, my recollection was that it said something about "can make changes to _the text of_ Final Maintenance Guidelines..." and I was going to argue that this does not affect the text. But I see that it's actually much stricter than that. Filed https://github.com/cabforum/forum/issues/39

    
 5. The allocation of customers, territories, or products in any way."

At the start of a Forum, CWG or sub-group Teleconference, the following "Note Well" shall be read:

> "All participants are reminded that they must comply with the CA/Browser Forum anti-trust policy, code of conduct, and intellectual property rights agreement, which can be found in section 1.3 of the Bylaws and cabforum.org. Please contact the chair with any comments or concerns about these policies".

Author: This particular "Note Well" was discussed and accepted via the Member's Mailing List. I think the existing language is clear and makes sense but I will defer to Native English speakers for possible improvements.

> "All participants are reminded that they must comply with the CA/Browser Forum anti-trust policy, code of conduct, and intellectual property rights agreement, which can be found in section 1.3 of the Bylaws and cabforum.org. Please contact the chair with any comments or concerns about these policies".

Reviewer 2: "All participants are reminded that they must comply with the CA/Browser Forum's Bylaws, which include an antitrust policy, a code of conduct, and an intellectual property rights agreement. Please contact the Forum Chair with any comments or concerns about the Bylaws or these policies."

> "All participants are reminded that they must comply with the CA/Browser Forum anti-trust policy, code of conduct, and intellectual property rights agreement, which can be found in section 1.3 of the Bylaws and cabforum.org. Please contact the chair with any comments or concerns about these policies".

Author: @

> "All participants are reminded that they must comply with the CA/Browser Forum's Bylaws, which include an antitrust policy, a code of conduct, and an intellectual property rights agreement. Please contact the Forum Chair with any comments or concerns about the Bylaws or these policies."

Ben, I think @clintwilson wanted to have a more specific reference. I'm happy without one but I'll defer to Clint because I'm not sure if this is a strong request from Apple's side.

> "All participants are reminded that they must comply with the CA/Browser Forum anti-trust policy, code of conduct, and intellectual property rights agreement, which can be found in section 1.3 of the Bylaws and cabforum.org. Please contact the chair with any comments or concerns about these policies".

Author: Resolving this thread as the proposed language seems to work for everyone.

> The antitrust compliance statement or note well does not need to be re-read when it has been read during a larger-scope meeting. For example, if there are three consecutive meetings (Forum-level, Server Certificate Working Group, Validation Subcommittee of the Server Certificate Working Group), the "antitrust statement/note well" needs to be read only at the beginning of the Forum-level meeting. 

Reviewer 3: The underlying assumption here would be that, in the case of consecutive meetings, the Forum-level meeting would always be the first? What should happen if another meeting starts the session of consecutive meetings?

Author: This is obviously not mandatory but changing the order means that the second meeting would have attendees that were not in the first meeting, and therefore the Chair of the second meeting would need to remind about the antitrust statement/note well so the new attendees are informed. Please let me know if this is too confusing or if you have a different proposal.

Author: I will close this out. We can reopen if the clarification is not enough.

Note: Based on Section 3.1 in version 2.4 of the Bylaws, it was allowed for a Certificate Issuer that partially met the CWG membership criteria to be accepted as "Associate Member". Once version 2.5 of the Bylaws becomes effective, these Associate Members will automatically be re-assigned to the "Probationary Member" membership category, as described in Section 3.3 below.

Voting Members that qualify under more than one category of Forum membership must choose only one membership category at the Forum level. Similarly, a Voting Member within a given CWG that qualifies under more than one category of CWG membership must choose only one membership category in that CWG.

## 2.2 Ending Forum Membership

When a Forum Member ceases to be a Member of at least one CWG, its Forum membership is terminated. Termination does not prevent a Member from potentially having continuing obligations, under the Forum's IPR Policy or any other document.

## 2.3 General Provisions Applicable to All Ballots

The following rules will apply to all ballots, including Draft Guideline Ballots (defined in 2.4).

 1. Only votes by Voting Members shall be accepted.
  

>  2. Only one vote per Voting Member company shall be accepted; Affiliates of Voting Members shall not vote. Only votes from a designated representative of a Voting Member ("Voting Representative") shall be accepted.

Reviewer 4: Nit: Voting Members are referenced as “organizations” in Section 2.1. Suggest changing “company” to “organization” for consistency.

Author: Fixed.

>  5. Voting Members may vote “yes”, “no”, or “abstain” on a ballot. Only votes that indicate a clear “yes” or “no” response to the ballot question shall be considered (i.e. votes to “abstain” and votes that do not indicate a clear “yes” or “no” response will not figure in the calculation of item (6), below).

Reviewer 4: Aside from “yes”, “no”, or “abstain” should any other commentary be included in the vote? Section 2.3(4) requires votes be "submitted properly" and I am wondering if the content of the vote needs to be specified for submission?

Author: Commentary has always been allowed. This "yes", "no", or "abstain" language is to indicate how the actual vote must be cast. The language for "submitted properly" was added to handle a case where a voting member submitted the vote from a representative that was not allowed to post to the public list, so that vote did not count. We've never had any issues since.

I suggest we keep this language as is, but if you want to suggest any improvements, please do.

Reviewer 4: Thank you for the explanation. I think I was having a hard time with the use of "proper" and "properly" in 2.3(4). Here is a suggestion for consideration in that section:

From: "Votes not submitted to the proper Public Mail List, or not submitted by a Voting Representative, by the end of the voting period (as specified in the ballot) will be considered invalid, and will not be counted for any purpose."

To: "Votes must be submitted by a Voting Representative to the correct Public Mail List by the end of the voting period (as specified in the ballot) to be considered valid and counted."

* Voting Member, which contains the following sub-categories:
   * Certificate Issuer: The member organization operates a certification authority that meets the requirements for membership as a Certificate Issuer in one or more CWGs.
   * Certificate Consumer: The member organization meets the requirements for membership as a Certificate Consumer in one or more CWGs.
* Associate Member: As defined in Section 3.1
* Interested Party: As defined in Section 3.2

> * Probational Certificate Issuer: A Certificate Issuer applying for membership but awaiting full qualification under Section 2.1. During the probational state, the organization has no voting rights. 

Reviewer 5: Do we want / need to set any limits on how long a CA can stay on as a Probational Certificate Issuer?

Author: We could but the specifics could be set in a CWG Charter. Should we suggest 1y with the option to renew? I recall some past discussions where we said we would consider all Members of that category for renewal during one of the 3 annual F2F meetings.

Author: Addressed in a9c4b4b47c8955d9d4fdf671e721cbaaf896e843

   * Certificate Consumer: The member organization meets the requirements for membership as a Certificate Consumer in one or more CWGs.
* Associate Member: As defined in Section 3.1
* Interested Party: As defined in Section 3.2

> * Probational Certificate Issuer: A Certificate Issuer applying for membership but awaiting full qualification under Section 2.1. During the probational state, the organization has no voting rights. 

Reviewer 3: Just going by how I understand the text and in particular section 3.1 before this series of edits, "Participation as Associate Member is by invite only." Has this been handled in some other way in practice?

In any case, by the new text, it is unclear how any entity becomes a "Probational Certificate Issuer". Certainly by withholding a signed IPR upon joining (5.5). But otherwise, is any entity that tries to join any CWG and somehow "awaits full qualification" automatically a "Probational Certificate Issuer" Member of the Forum?

Should we maybe explicitely delegate the question of when and to whom this applies to the CWG Charters? And in addition, should we keep the requirement (for CWG Charters to fulfill) that such status is attainable "by invite only"?

Author: > Just going by how I understand the text and in particular section 3.1 before this series of edits, "Participation as Associate Member is by invite only." Has this been handled in some other way in practice?

If you are talking about Associate Members such as WebTrust, ETSI, ACAB'c or FPKI, I don't know, but I assume there was some correspondence years ago. I'm not sure what part of the existing text you find problematic.

> In any case, by the new text, it is unclear how any entity becomes a "Probational Certificate Issuer"

We will follow existing practice, which means that an Applicant that wants to enter the "Certificate Issuer" category, will apply as if everything is met to become a "Certificate Issuer" even if they are missing some of the criteria. They are usually missing the "Trusted by a Certificate Consumer" part. The CWG will evaluate the application and if everything else checks out, the Applicant will become a "Probational Certificate Issuer".

Hope this is a bit clearer.

> Should we maybe explicitely delegate the question of when and to whom this applies to the CWG Charters? And in addition, should we keep the requirement (for CWG Charters to fulfill) that such status is attainable "by invite only"?

We should keep the "invite only" for Associate Members that are more of the "WebTrust", "ETSI" type and not for "CA Issuers". This is what this change is trying to address.

Reviewer 3: I agree with your comment in so far as I agree that what you describe is a reasonable outcome and mirrors the current practice as I understand it. But I think we should maybe try to work on the language to make this even more clear.

Author: The application process for membership will be further clarified in the individual WG charters and the template in the Bylaws. We will try to make the expectations for membership applications more clear there.

 5. Voting Members may vote “yes”, “no”, or “abstain” on a ballot. Only votes that indicate a clear “yes” or “no” response to the ballot question shall be considered (i.e. votes to “abstain” and votes that do not indicate a clear “yes” or “no” response will not figure in the calculation of item (6), below).

>  6. Voting Members fall into two categories: Certificate Issuers and  Certificate Consumers. In order for a ballot to be adopted by the Forum, two-thirds (2/3) or more of the votes cast by the Voting Members in the Certificate Issuer category must be in favor of the ballot, and at least fifty percent (50%) plus one (1) of the votes cast by the Voting Members in the Certificate Consumer category must be in favor of the ballot. At least one (1) Voting Member in each category must vote in favor of a ballot for the ballot to be adopted.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
 6. Voting Members fall into two categories: Certificate Issuers and Certificate Consumers. In order for a ballot to be adopted by the Forum, two-thirds (2/3) or more of the votes cast by the Voting Members in the Certificate Issuer category must be in favor of the ballot, and at least fifty percent (50%) plus one (1) of the votes cast by the Voting Members in the Certificate Consumer category must be in favor of the ballot. At least one (1) Voting Member in each category must vote in favor of a ballot for the ballot to be adopted.
```

 2. As described in Section 2.3(3), there will be a discussion period of at least seven (7) days before votes are cast on a Draft Guideline Ballot, with the start date of such discussion period clearly specified in the ballot. The discussion period shall end and the voting period shall commence also according to the procedure specified in Section 2.3(3).

>  3. As described in Section 2.3(4), upon commencement of the voting period, Voting Members shall have exactly seven (7) calendar days to vote on a Draft Guideline Ballot, with the deadline clearly communicated in the ballot sent via a Public Mail List. For ballots related to the Forum level, votes must be sent to the Public Mail List of the Forum. For ballots related to a CWG, votes must be sent to the Public Mail List of the CWG. All voting will take place via the proper Public Mail List. Votes not submitted to the Public Mail List or not submitted by a Voting Representative, will not be considered valid, and will not be counted for any purpose. The Chair may send an email to a Public Mail List reminding Voting Members of when the voting period opens and closes.

Reviewer 4: Should a Voting Representative from the “proposing” organization cast a vote?

Author: Yes, I don't think this has ever been challenged. Are you suggesting to change this language to forbid the proposing organization from casting a vote?

Reviewer 4: Sorry, I should have added more context. I was not intending to suggest a change to forbid the action, but lacked the historical context to know whether or not the action was forbidden or permitted. Based on the last few ballots it appears it is permitted, but not required (i.e., someone from an organization can propose a ballot and not cast a vote). 

Upon voting for a ballot proposed by our team the first time, we had to seek clarification related to this from other Forum members. Making it clear that the proposing organization can also vote may help future Forum members.

Author: I added the following text to clarify:

`The proposing and endorsing organizations may also vote.`

That should make things clearer but please feel free to suggest a better sentence.

Reviewer 4: LGTM

## 3.1 Associate Members

> Membership in the Forum or CWGs as an Associate Member may be by invitation when the CA/Browser Forum determines that maintaining such a relationship will be of benefit to the work of the Forum. In the past, entities qualifying as Associate Members have included the ACAB'c, AICPA/CICA WebTrust Task Force, the European Telecommunications Standards Institute (ETSI), the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers, tScheme and the U.S. Federal PKI. In order to become an Associate Member, an organization must sign a mutual letter of intent/understanding, or other similar agreement, and the Forum's IPR Policy Agreement, unless this latter requirement is waived in writing by the Forum based on overriding policies of the Associate Member's own organization IPR rules.

Reviewer 6: Given the updated, more specific category of membership represented by Associate Member in this ballot, combined with the desire expressed in recent discussions related to this ballot for Forum membership (but not Voting status) to be generally accessible, I think it would be appropriate (and a minor improvement) to remove the entire second sentence of this paragraph.

Author: I think this comment is based on a previous version of the ballot. The latest one includes the following language which keeps it consistent with the Probationary Member category:

```Associate Members may attend face-to-face meetings, communicate with other Members on the Member Mail List and/or Public Mail List, and access the Member Wiki Website. Associate Members may not propose or endorse ballots or take part in any form of voting except on special straw polls of the Forum or CWGs (e.g. when selecting meeting dates, locations, etc.).```

See also https://github.com/cabforum/forum/commit/207eaa4f954e9a84bea3ac61edefff622632ec67.

Does this address your concerns?

Author: @clintwilson, I intend to close this by EOD (Monday) assuming it addresses your concerns. If you still have concerns and feel strongly about it, please re-open.

Author: I'd rather not make any changes to that part of the Bylaws because it would require a larger discussion. I recall that those "mutual letter[s] of intent/understanding" have been used at least once, to establish a collaboration between CABF and ETSI. Perhaps there will be other candidate Associate Members that have bureaucracy to set up collaboration with non-incorporated entities.

Are you ok to table this for now and discuss at the next set of changes/improvements of the Bylaws? I will create a new issue so we don't forget this.

Author: I filed https://github.com/cabforum/forum/issues/38 so closing for now.

> Associate Members may attend face-to-face meetings, communicate with other Members on the Member Mail List and/or Public Mail List, and access the Member Wiki Website. Associate Members are not entitled to vote except on special straw polls of the Forum or CWGs (e.g. when selecting meeting dates, locations, etc.).

Reviewer 4: Since “voting” has specific requirements for ballots in Section 2.3 and Section 4.1, should we define what “special straw polls” are and how they are conducted since this activity includes “votes” from Associate Members?

We should also clarify if Associate Members can propose or endorse ballots, using similar language from Section 3.3 Probationary Member.

Author: Regarding the first comment about "special straw polls", I don't think we need to make it more explicit. It's ok to have some flexibility for when the Forum asks the opinion of Associate Members or Interested Parties. The critical part is proposing, endorsing and voting for ballot for which I don't think they are allowed to do that.

Regarding the second comment, sure, we can be more explicit and use similar language as in section 3.3 for Associated Members. I will proceed with the following update to the last paragraph of section 3.1:

`Associate Members may not propose or endorse ballots or take part in any form of voting except on special straw polls of the Forum or CWGs (e.g. when selecting meeting dates, locations, etc.).`

I hope this works. Please let me know if you have other suggestions.

Reviewer 4: LGTM

      
    If more than one candidate is nominated for Chair or Vice Chair, the Forum Chair will submit an election ballot, with the exception of not requiring endorsers or a discussion period, to determine which candidate will fill the position. Within two (2) weeks after the close of the nomination period, the Chair or Vice Chair will establish an election committee and announce the election ballot on the Member Mail List along with the ballot start date, ballot end date, and a description of the voting process. The Chair or Vice Chair will appoint the election committee by selecting at least two (2) volunteers who have a reputation for independence, preferably individuals without voting rights in the Forum and who participate as representatives of Associate Members. The election committee is responsible solely for tallying Voting Member votes from their Voting Representatives in connection with the election ballot. The description must include the email address(es) to where Voting Representatives will send their vote, which should be the email addresses of the members of the election committee.

>     For election ballots, each Voting Member is entitled to a single vote regardless of the number of Voting Representatives it may have or whether the Voting Member is categorized as a Certificate Issuer or a Certificate Consumer. Only Voting Representatives are allowed to cast votes on behalf of Voting Members. If multiple votes are received from a Voting Member, the last vote submitted during the voting period by its Voting Representative is considered the Voting Member's vote. Within two (2) weeks after the election ballot closes, the election committee will compile the votes, ensure that only one (1) vote is counted per Voting Member, confirm the results with other members of the election committee, and publish the ballot results by sending an email to the Public Mail List. The election committee will not include any votes submitted before or after the voting period when compiling the votes. The ballot results email will contain only the following information: a short description of the ballot purpose, the total number of votes submitted during the ballot period, and the name of the nominee receiving the most votes. The election committee may include other language as necessary to accurately describe the ballot and any concerns the election committee had with the ballot, provided that such language does not disclose how individual Voting Members voted. The election committee will treat the votes of individual Voting Members as confidential information. The nominee receiving the most votes is appointed to the applicable position, regardless of the number of votes cast and irrespective of whether two thirds (2/3) of the Certificate Issuers or fifty percent (50%) plus one (1) of the Certificate Consumers voted for the nominee. If the election ballot results in a tie among the candidates receiving the most votes, the Forum Chair or Forum Vice Chair will call for another election ballot that includes only the two tying candidates.

Reviewer 4: Should a Voting Representative from the “nominee” organization cast a vote?

Author: Yes. Similarly as with the proposer voting. It is commonly allowed for a nominee to vote for themselves. Let me know if you have a different proposal.

Reviewer 4: Same as above. Making it clear that the nominee organization can also vote may help future Forum members.

Author: Added a sentence:
`The nominee organization(s) may also vote.`

Let me know if that works.

Reviewer 4: LGTM

 2. Manner of conducting nominations: At least sixty (60) days prior to the expiration of the current Chair’s term or upon his/her early termination as Chair, the Chair or Vice Chair will announce through the management mailing list that nominations are open for the office of Chair and the Vice Chair will automatically be nominated as the next Chair, but Forum Voting Members may nominate their own representatives or representatives of other Voting Members to be additional candidates as Chair. A Vice Chair may decline the nomination to the office of Chair and/or indicate an intent to seek nomination for re-election to the office of Vice Chair. The nomination period for Chair will last for at least one (1) week but no longer than four (4) weeks. Upon the close of the nominations for Chair, the nomination period for the office of Vice Chair shall immediately open. The nomination period for Vice Chair will last for at least one (1) week but no longer than four (4) weeks.

>  3. Manner of holding officer elections: If a single individual is nominated for a position, the Forum will hold a ballot prepared and submitted by the Chair, with the exception of not requiring endorsers, to confirm appointment of the nominee. For the confirmation ballot, each Voting Member is entitled to a single vote regardless of the number of participating Voting Member representatives or whether the Voting Member is categorized as a Certificate Issuer or a Certificate Consumer. Only designated Voting Representatives are allowed to cast votes on behalf of Voting Members. If multiple votes are received from a Voting Member’s representatives, the last vote submitted during the voting period is considered the Voting Member’s vote. The single nominee is considered confirmed if a majority of the Voting Members who vote are in favor of the appointment, regardless of the number of votes cast and irrespective of whether 2/3 of the Certificate Issuers or 1/2 of the Certificate Consumers approve appointment of the nominee.

Reviewer 7: Should we not use the same voting conditions here? 
So, `50%+1` like in 2.3.6 instead of `1/2`

```suggestion
 3. Manner of holding officer elections: If a single individual is nominated for a position, the Forum will hold a ballot prepared and submitted by the Chair, with the exception of not requiring endorsers, to confirm appointment of the nominee. For the confirmation ballot, each Voting Member is entitled to a single vote regardless of the number of participating Voting Member representatives or whether the Voting Member is categorized as a Certificate Issuer or a Certificate Consumer. Only designated Voting Representatives are allowed to cast votes on behalf of Voting Members. If multiple votes are received from a Voting Member’s representatives, the last vote submitted during the voting period is considered the Voting Member’s vote. The single nominee is considered confirmed if a majority of the Voting Members who vote are in favor of the appointment, regardless of the number of votes cast and irrespective of whether 2/3 of the Certificate Issuers or fifty percent (50%) plus one (1) of the Certificate Consumers approve appointment of the nominee.
```

Author: I agree with the suggestion. I will leave it open for any other possible comments, especially from @timfromdigicert who will work on the elections language.

      
    If more than one candidate is nominated for Chair or Vice Chair, the Chair will submit an election ballot, with the exception of not requiring endorsers, to determine which candidate will fill the position. Within two (2) weeks after the close of the nomination period, the Chair or Vice Chair will establish an election committee and announce the election ballot on the management mailing list along with the ballot start date, ballot end date, and a description of the voting process. The Chair or Vice Chair will appoint the election committee by selecting at least two (2) volunteers who have a reputation for independence, preferably individuals without voting rights in the Forum and that participate as Associate Members. The election committee is responsible solely for tallying Voting Member votes from their Voting Representatives in connection with the election ballot. The description must include the email address(es) where Voting Member Voting Representatives will send their vote, which should be the email addresses of the election committee.
    

>     For election ballots, each Voting Member is entitled to a single vote regardless of the number of participating Voting Member representatives or whether the Voting Member is categorized as a Certificate Issuer or a Certificate Consumer. Only designated Voting Representatives are allowed to cast votes on behalf of Voting Members. If multiple votes are received from a Voting Member’s representatives, the last vote submitted during the voting period is considered the Voting Member’s vote. Within two (2) weeks after the election ballot closes, the election committee will compile the votes, ensure that only one (1) vote is counted per Voting Member, confirm the results with other members of the election committee, and publish the ballot results by sending an email to the Public Mail List. The election committee will not include any votes submitted before or after the voting period when compiling the votes. The ballot results email will contain only the following information: a short description of the ballot purpose, the total number of votes submitted during the ballot period, and the name of the nominee receiving the most votes. The election committee may include other language as necessary to accurately describe the ballot and any concerns the election committee had with the ballot, provided that such language does not disclose how individual Voting Members voted. The election committee will treat the votes of individual Voting Members as confidential information. The nominee receiving the most votes is appointed to the applicable position, regardless of the number of votes cast and irrespective of whether two thirds (2/3) of the Certificate Issuers or fifty percent (50%) of the Certificate Consumers voted for the nominee. If the election ballot results in a tie among the candidates receiving the most votes, the Chair or Vice Chair will call for another election ballot that includes only the two tying candidates.

Reviewer 7: Align with the previous comment, stating `fifty percent (50%) plus one (1) `

```suggestion
    For election ballots, each Voting Member is entitled to a single vote regardless of the number of participating Voting Member representatives or whether the Voting Member is categorized as a Certificate Issuer or a Certificate Consumer. Only designated Voting Representatives are allowed to cast votes on behalf of Voting Members. If multiple votes are received from a Voting Member’s representatives, the last vote submitted during the voting period is considered the Voting Member’s vote. Within two (2) weeks after the election ballot closes, the election committee will compile the votes, ensure that only one (1) vote is counted per Voting Member, confirm the results with other members of the election committee, and publish the ballot results by sending an email to the Public Mail List. The election committee will not include any votes submitted before or after the voting period when compiling the votes. The ballot results email will contain only the following information: a short description of the ballot purpose, the total number of votes submitted during the ballot period, and the name of the nominee receiving the most votes. The election committee may include other language as necessary to accurately describe the ballot and any concerns the election committee had with the ballot, provided that such language does not disclose how individual Voting Members voted. The election committee will treat the votes of individual Voting Members as confidential information. The nominee receiving the most votes is appointed to the applicable position, regardless of the number of votes cast and irrespective of whether two thirds (2/3) of the Certificate Issuers or fifty percent (50%) plus one (1) of the Certificate Consumers voted for the nominee. If the election ballot results in a tie among the candidates receiving the most votes, the Chair or Vice Chair will call for another election ballot that includes only the two tying candidates.
```

Author: Similarly, as in https://github.com/cabforum/forum/pull/32#discussion_r1162666897

The Forum shall maintain a Member Mail List and Member Web Site that are not accessible by the public. The following matters may be posted to the Member Mail List and Member Web Site:

>  1. Draft minutes of Forum meetings or Teleconferences (both virtual and in-person, and including any Forum-level sub-groups or committees) will be posted to the Member Mail List or a Member Mail list of a sub-group or committee, to allow Members and Associate Members to make sure they are being correctly reported.

Reviewer 7: We might want to reconsider the addition of `Teleconferences` as here we state that a teleconference can be in-person, which contradicts the term (a conference with participants in different locations linked by telecommunication devices). 

Maybe we should simply talk about a `virtual meeting` and a `physical meeting` troughout the document? Or define a `meeting` as a `virtual` or `physical meeting` in the definitions.

Author: There are specific definitions for a Teleconference and a Forum Meeting. I don't feel we should make updates in those definitions. "Forum Meetings" can be "virtual" or "in-person" or even "hybrid". However, "Teleconferences" can only be "virtual". @vanbroup can you please suggest some better wording without the need to update the existing definitions?

Reviewer 7: If we have Meetings (which will be physical) and Teleconferences which will be (virtual) we can simply the language as following: 
```suggestion
 1. Draft minutes of Meetings and Teleconferences (including any Forum-level sub-groups or committees) will be posted to the relevant Member Mail list, to allow Members and Associate Members to make sure they are being correctly reported.
```

Author: Here is the update taking parts of your proposed language. https://github.com/cabforum/forum/pull/32/commits/040c0e293382925323d0240cb0312d2308f00f4b.

Let me know if it works.

Reviewer 7: This could work while it's still confusing and remains hard to read:

It first starts with **Forum Meetings** and follows with a statement that it's **not just forum meetings**, why not just state **meetings** instead if we don't want to restrict it anyway?

I also keep struggling over "**Member Mail List or a Member Mail list of a sub-group or committee**", simply stating "**the corresponding Member Mail list**" which should be sufficient to link it to the forum, sub-group, or committee.

Author: "Forum Meetings" is a capitalized term which is defined as "Face-to-face plenary meetings of Voting Members, Probational Certificate Issuers and Associate Members as scheduled from time to time, and does not include meetings such as Subcommittee, subgroup, committee, or PAG meetings."

I took another take. Please take a look at https://github.com/cabforum/forum/pull/32/commits/0796f0c777d99cec5be8dc2bb3994d100e854c90 and tell me if it makes things clearer.

Reviewer 7: That reads a lot better! You might want to replace the comma with 'and' in the first part of the sentence.

> Draft minutes of Forum Meetings **and** Forum Teleconferences will be posted to the corresponding Member Mail List

Author: Done. Thanks for the feedback :-)

The Forum shall maintain a Member Mail List and Member Web Site that are not accessible by the public. The following matters may be posted to the Member Mail List and Member Web Site:

>  1. Draft minutes of Forum Meetings and Forum Teleconferences will be posted to the corresponding Member Mail List to allow Members to make sure they are being correctly reported. Sub-groups and committees may also post to a corresponding Member Mail List. Minutes will be considered final when approved at a subsequent Forum Meeting or Forum Teleconference; provided, however, that if there is no Forum Meeting or Forum Teleconference scheduled within three (3) weeks of the publication of the draft minutes. Final minutes will then be posted to the corresponding Public Mail List or if it relates to a sub-group or committee, they will be posted to the corresponding Public Mail List of the sub-group or committee. Final minutes of Forum meetings or Forum Teleconferences will additionally be posted to the Public Web Site. The Chair will, upon request, make redactions of any part of the public copy of the minutes identified as private or sensitive by either the information discloser or a member mentioned or affiliated with the subject of the information.

Reviewer 6: `Minutes will be considered final when approved at a subsequent Forum Meeting or Forum Teleconference; provided, however, that if there is no Forum Meeting or Forum Teleconference scheduled within three (3) weeks of the publication of the draft minutes.` ->
`Minutes will be considered final when approved at a subsequent Forum Meeting or Forum Teleconference, except if there is no Forum Meeting or Forum Teleconference scheduled within three (3) weeks of the publication of the draft minutes, in which case Minutes will be considered final three (3) weeks after publication of the draft minutes.`

I'm not sure that's what was originally intended, so replace `three (3) weeks after publication of the draft minutes.` with whatever the correct criteria are.

Author: Addressed in 090c6289f42e46e535db392274bb8fe251ee05fd

> Members are strongly discouraged from posting the text of Member Mail List messages to the Forum Public Mail List without the permission of the author or commenter.

Reviewer 7: This should not only talk about the Forum Public Mail List:

```suggestion
Members are strongly discouraged from posting the text of Member Mail List messages to a Public Mail List without the permission of the author or commenter.
```

Author: Sounds like a good improvement. Leaving it open for more possible comments.

> These activities should be followed by any Chartered Working Group ensuring the use of the Working Group's Public Mail List instead of the Forum-level Public Mail List. Working Groups may use the Forum Member List but they are encouraged to maintain a separate Member Mail List. Working Groups may use the Forum Member Web Site but they must maintain a separate section designated for material related to the specific Working Group.

Reviewer 7: I'm not sure about the intention of `These activities should be followed by any Chartered Working Group` here.

The first sentence states `ensure the use`, while the second sentence continues with `may use`, what is the purpose of this addition?

```suggestion
Chartered Working Groups should use the Working Group's Public Mail List instead of the Forum-level Public Mail List when such list is availible. Working Groups may use the Forum Member List but they are encouraged to maintain a separate Member Mail List. Working Groups may use the Forum Member Web Site but they must maintain a separate section designated for material related to the specific Working Group.
```

Author: The intent is to force each CWG to use its own public mailing list and not the Forum's public list for their CWG activities. See https://docs.google.com/document/d/1EtrIy3F5cPge0_M-C8J6fe72KcVI8H5Q_2S6S31ynU0/edit#heading=h.my9hanmafjby for more information. 

It is very confusing when the public expects to find minutes or other Bylaws-mandated posts to the CWG's public list and the Chair/Vice-Chair decides to post using the Forum's public list. The "may" was probably left from the time of the governance reform. I don't think this is needed anymore. 

Is it ok to keep the previous language?

Reviewer 7: The problem is that the current/updated language doesn't read well. Do you suggest deleting the sentence: `Working Groups may use the Forum Member List but they are encouraged to maintain a separate Member Mail List.`?

That would resolve the conflicting language, but the first sentence would still require a re-write. 

Combined this would make:

```suggestion
These activities should be followed by any Chartered Working Group.  Chartered Working Groups shall use the Working Group's Mail Lists instead of the Forum-level Mail Lists. Working Groups may use the Forum Member Web Site but they must maintain a separate section designated for material related to the specific Working Group.
```

I'm not convinced that the first part of this sentence is adding any value.

Members have discretion about which mailing list they use, but are strongly encouraged to use the Public Mail List for matters other than those listed above.

> Members are strongly discouraged from posting the text of Member Mail List messages to a Public Mail List without the permission of the author or commenter.

Reviewer 6: I suggest further modifying this line to connect it to the requirements of the Code of Conduct. I would propose the following, but am not particularly married to this specific text:

`Members are strongly discouraged from reposting the text of Member Mail List messages without the permission of the author or commenter. Doing so may violate the Code of Conduct.`

Author: Updated https://github.com/cabforum/forum/pull/32/commits/3c3a1aa55886ff217ac9c808f96a5e9a9582fc11

    * Means of communication to be used by the Working Group (see subsection (4) below)
    * Applicability of the IPR Policy

>  3. After the charter is approved, the CWG MAY elect a new Chair and Vice Chair elected by CWG members following the procedures of Bylaws Section 4.1 as closely as possible. However, unlike at the Forum level, CWG Chairs and Vice Chairs may run for re-election if they so choose. The initial term for CWG officers shall expire on November 30 of the next even-numbered year after the CWG is established in order to be synchronized with the terms of Forum officers. Proposing and voting on all CWG Ballots by CWG members shall follow the procedures stated in Bylaws Sec. 2.3 and 2.4 with the exception of not requiring a proposer and endorsers. The CWG Chair will send an invitation to the Public Mail List for an initial CWG meeting and will solicit eligible Voting Members, Associate Members and Interested Parties (as specified in the charter) with expertise and interest in the CWG’s subject matter to participate in the CWG. In order to participate in a Working Group, a party must have agreed to the IPR Policy Agreement and formally declared participation. Each CWG Chair shall be responsible for ensuring that all parties attending the respective CWG meetings have signed the IPR Policy Agreement and have formally declared their participation in the CWG via the mechanism designated by the Forum prior to attending.

Reviewer 3: If I see correctly, you removed one of two whitespaces just before "The inital term" and nothing else?

I assume this was a mistake. It is obviously not very critical, but the resulting redline would for sure be less confusing without it, so it might be worth correcting.

Author: "Fixed". We should make a separate pass at the end of the v2.5 drafting to fix all those issues, but until that happens, I agree we must focus on the more meaningful changes first.

## 5.4 Forum Teleconferences and Forum Meetings

From time to time the Forum and CWGs will hold Teleconferences and Meetings among the Voting Members, Probational Certificate Issuers and Associate Members, who may participate in person or (where feasible) by teleconference. Interested Parties and others may be invited by the Forum or CWG Chair, in the Chair’s discretion, to participate in those portions of Teleconferences and CWG Meetings that are relevant to their expertise or their participation.

## 5.5 IPR policies

As a requirement for membership, Voting Members must execute and return to the CWG Chair the IPR Policy Agreement attached as Exhibit A before participating in any CWG. As the IPR Policy is amended from time to time, Members will be required to execute and return a new IPR Agreement within ninety (90) days of the CWG Chair’s written request. If a Voting Member fails to execute and return the new IPR Policy Agreement within such 90-day period, then the Member's CWG and Forum membership shall default to a Probational Certificate Issuer until the agreement is signed and returned.

> As a requirement for participation in any CWG as a Probational Certificate Issuer, an Associate Member or Interested Party, the IPR Policy Agreement attached as Exhibit A must be executed and returned to the CWG Chair  before participating in any CWG. As the IPR Policy is amended from time to time, Probational Certificate Issuers, Associate Members and Interested Parties will be required to execute and return a new IPR Policy Agreement within ninety (90) days of the CWG Chair’s written request. If an Associate Member or Interested Party fails to execute and return the new IPR Policy Agreement within such 90-day period, its participation in Forum calls, meetings, activities, and events shall be suspended until the agreement is signed and returned.

Reviewer 7: Remove double whitespace:
```suggestion
As a requirement for participation in any CWG as a Probational Certificate Issuer, an Associate Member or Interested Party, the IPR Policy Agreement attached as Exhibit A must be executed and returned to the CWG Chair before participating in any CWG. As the IPR Policy is amended from time to time, Probational Certificate Issuers, Associate Members and Interested Parties will be required to execute and return a new IPR Policy Agreement within ninety (90) days of the CWG Chair’s written request. If an Associate Member or Interested Party fails to execute and return the new IPR Policy Agreement within such 90-day period, its participation in Forum calls, meetings, activities, and events shall be suspended until the agreement is signed and returned.
```

    * Deliberately intimidating or stalking another person (in-person, online, or by other means).
    * Inappropriately disrupting or impeding official Forum events, including meetings, talks, and presentations. For purposes of this Code, "inappropriate disruption" would include aggressive, violent, and abusive conduct that prevents an official Forum event from occurring or proceeding.
    * Spamming, trolling, flaming, baiting, and other similar behavior inappropriately directed towards an individual.
    * Lying, deceiving, or intentionally misleading by omission or half-truth.
    * Advocating for, or encouraging, any of the above behavior.

 3. All Forum participants should promote the rules of this Code and take action to bring discussions back into compliance with the Code whenever violations are observed.

 4. Forum participants should stick to ideological, conceptual discussions and avoid engaging in offensive or sensitive personal discussions, particularly if they're off-topic; such personal discussions can lead to unnecessary arguments, hurt feelings, and damaged trust. 

**II. Moderation.** These are the policies for upholding the Code.

>  1. Resist the urge to be defensive. Remember that it's your responsibility to clearly communicate your message to your fellow participants. Everyone wants to get along and we are all in the Forum first and foremost because we want to talk about standards and everything that involves. Other participants will be eager to assume good intent and forgive as long as you have earned their trust.

Reviewer 4: Nit: 1. and 2. are not formatted as items within the list.

Author: Fixed but please check again in case the rendering is not the one expected.

Reviewer 4: LGTM
